README.md, before:

# Config

A library for declaring configuration vars and setting their values in a
centralized fashion. Included tooling allows one to gather and emit all config
vars and their docstrings, default values, etc.

[Latest API Docs](https://outpace.github.io/config/latest/)

[Stable (0.13.0) API Docs](https://outpace.github.io/config/0.13.0/)

[![Build Status](https://travis-ci.org/outpace/config.svg?branch=master)](https://travis-ci.org/outpace/config)


## Installation

Applications and libraries wishing to declare config vars should add the
following to the `project.clj` file:

[![Clojars Project](http://clojars.org/com.outpace/config/latest-version.svg)](http://clojars.org/com.outpace/config)

Applications may also include the following to ease
[generating a `config.edn` file](#generator-usage):

```clojure
:aliases {"config" ["run" "-m" "outpace.config.generate"]}
```


## Motivation

Most configuration systems rely on consumers pulling named values from something
akin to a global map
(cf. [environ](https://github.com/weavejester/environ)). This yields a number of
negative consequences:

- It is difficult to identify what configuration values are required by a
  system.
- There is no single place to put documentation for a configurable entry.
- Multiple consumers may independently pull directly from the configuration
  source, leaving only the configuration key to reveal their shared dependency.
- Default values for missing configuration can be inconsistent across consumers.
- Sources of configuration values are widely varied, e.g., properties files,
  system environment variables.

This library attempts to address the above issues by:

- Using declaration of configurable vars, which can be documented, defaulted,
  and used as a canonical source of data for other code just as any other
  library-specific var would be.
- Providing introspection into the configurable surface of an application and
  its dependencies.
- Relying on pushing values to all configuration vars, and doing so from a
  single source.


## Overview

Configuration is provided in an [EDN](http://edn-format.org) map of namespaced
symbols (naming a config var) to the value to be bound to the corresponding var:

```clojure
{
com.example/greeting       "Hello World!"
com.example/tree           {:id 1, :children #{{:id 2} {:id 3}}}
com.example/aws-secret-key #config/env "AWS_SECRET_KEY"
com.example/path           #config/property "some.path"
com.example/db-password    #config/file "db-password.txt"
com.example/secret-edn     #config/edn #config/file "secret_key.edn"
}
```

As shown above, custom data-reader tags can be used to
[pull values from external sources](#external-config-values).

The configuration EDN map is provided to an application in one of the following
ways:

1. A `config.edn` file in the current working directory.
2. A `config.edn` java system property (e.g., a command line arg
   `-Dconfig.edn=...`). The value can be any string consumable by
   [`clojure.java.io/reader`](http://clojure.github.io/clojure/clojure.java.io-api.html#clojure.java.io/reader).
3. A `resource.config.edn` java system property pointing to a resource file.
4. Setting `outpace.config.bootstrap/explicit-config-source` to any non-nil
   value consumable by
   [`clojure.java.io/reader`](http://clojure.github.io/clojure/clojure.java.io-api.html#clojure.java.io/reader).

The `:profiles` entry of your `project.clj` file can be used to set the system
property for an environment-specific configuration EDN file:

```clojure
:profiles {:test {:jvm-opts ["-Dconfig.edn=test-config.edn"]}
           :prod {:jvm-opts ["-Dconfig.edn=prod-config.edn"]}}
```

Alternatively, different profiles can share the same config file name, but use different resource paths:

```clojure
:profiles {:test {:resource-paths ["test_resources"] :jvm-opts ["-Dresource.config.edn=app-config.edn"]}
           :prod {:resource-paths ["prod_resources"] :jvm-opts ["-Dresource.config.edn=app-config.edn"]}}
```


## Config Usage

Declaring config vars is straightforward:

```clojure
(require '[outpace.config :refer [defconfig]])

(defconfig my-var)

(defconfig var-with-default 42)

(defconfig ^:dynamic *rebindable-var*)

(defconfig ^:required required-var)

(defconfig ^{:validate [number? "Must be a number."
                        even?   "Must be even."]}
           an-even-number)
```

As shown above, the `defconfig` form supports anything a regular `def` form
does, as well as the following metadata:
- `:required` When true, an exception will be thrown if no default nor
  configured value is provided. See also `defconfig!`
- `:validate` A vector of alternating single-arity predicates and error
  messages. After a value is set on the var, an exception will be thrown when a
  predicate, passed the set value, yields false.

The `outpace.config` namespace includes the current state of the configuration,
and while it can be used by code to explicitly pull config values, **this is
strongly discouraged**; just use `defconfig`.


## External Config Values

Recognizing that it is not always appropriate to provide configuration values
directly in the config file, custom data-readers can be used to instead convert
a tagged literal in the config to an externally-provided value.  This allows one
to still grasp the full configuration of an app, and at least know where a value
will come from, if not the value itself.

The provided data-readers' tags are:

- `#config/env` Tags a string, interpreted as the name of an environment
  variable, and yields the string value of the environment variable. If the
  environment does not have that entry, then the var will use its default value
  or remain unbound.
- `#config/property` Tags a string, interpreted as the name of java system
  property, and yields the string value of the property. If there is no property
  defined by this name, then the var will use its default value or remain
  unbound.
- `#config/file` Tags a string, interpreted as a path to a file, and yields the
  string contents of the file. If the file does not exist, then the var will use
  its default value or remain unbound.
- `#config/edn` Tags a string, interpreted as a single EDN-formatted object, and
  yields the read object.  When composed with `#config/env`, `#config/file`, or
  `#config/property`, if the external value is not provided, then the var will
  use its default value or remain unbound.

[Custom data-readers](http://clojure.org/reader#The Reader--Tagged Literals)
whose tag namespace is `config` will be automatically loaded during config
initialization. See `outpace.config/read-env` for an example of how to properly
implement a custom data-reader.


## Backup configuration sources

It is possible to use `#config/or` to be able to use multiple sources of
external configuration values.  It tags a vector where the first external value
will be used.

In the following example, the value from the environment variable `APP_HOME`
will be used.  However, if it is not provided, it will fall back to the
`app.home` system property.  If neither external value is availabe, the var
will use its default value or remain unbound.

```clojure
#config/or [#config/env "APP_HOME"
            #config/property "app.home"]
```


## Generator Usage

The `outpace.config.generate` namespace exists to generate a `config.edn` file
containing everything one may need to know about the state of the config vars in
the application and its dependent namespaces. If a `config.edn` file is already
present, its contents will be loaded, and thus preserved by the replacing file.

To generate a `config.edn` file, invoke the following in the same directory as
your `project.clj` file:

```bash
lein run -m outpace.config.generate
```

Alternately, one can just invoke `lein config` by adding the following to
`project.clj`:

```clojure
:aliases {"config" ["run" "-m" "outpace.config.generate"]}
```

The generator can take an optional `:strict` flag (e.g., `lein config :strict`)
that will result in an exception after file generation if there are any config
vars with neither a default value nor configured value. This can be used to
provide feedback to automated build systems.

The following is an example of a generated `config.edn` file:

```clojure
{

;; UNBOUND CONFIG VARS:

; This is the docstring for the 'foo' var. This
; var does not have a default value.
#_com.example/foo


;; UNUSED CONFIG ENTRIES:

com.example/bar 123


;; CONFIG ENTRIES:

; The docstring for aaa.
com.example/aaa :configured-aaa

; The docstring for bbb. This var has a default value.
com.example/bbb :configured-bbb #_:default-bbb

; The docstring for ccc. This var has a default value.
#_com.example/ccc #_:default-ccc

}
```

The first section lists commented-out config vars that do not have a default
value nor configured value, thus will be unbound at runtime. If a config value
is provided, these entries will be re-categorized after regeneration.

The second section lists config entries that have no corresponding config
var. This may happen after code change, or when a dependent library has been
removed. If the config var reappears, these entries will be re-categorized after
regeneration.

The third section lists all config vars used by the system, and their respective
values.  For reference purposes, commented-out default values will be included
after the configured value.  Likewise, commented-out entries will be included
when their default values are used.

## Change Log

### v0.13.0
- Add support for loading configuration from resources via the
  `resources.config.edn` system property. @rafalprzywarski

### v0.12.0
- Add support for `#config/or`

### v0.11.0
- Fixed `outpace.config.repl/reload` to re-read config.

### v0.10.0
- Add `#config/property` data-reader which sets a config var's value to the
  contents of a Java property.

### v0.9.0
- A required config (e.g. defconfig!) will not cause an error when running the
  generator.
- When running the generator if an error occurs, its details will be printed.

### v0.8.0
- `extract` and `provides?` now recursively visit data structures.  This allows
  something like the following in your `config.edn` file (which did not work
  before):

  ```clojure
  {foo.bar/aws-creds {:access-key #config/env "AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID"
                      :secret-key #config/env "AWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY"}}
  ```

### v0.7.0
- Add `#config/edn` data-reader which can be composed with other readers to
  interpret values from content.

### v0.6.0
- Add `#config/file` data-reader which sets a config var's value to the contents
  of a file.

### v0.5.0

- Add `:validate` metadata support to `defconfig`.
- Generator now pretty-prints wide values.

### v0.4.0

- Add ability to set the config-source explicitly in-code. Allows custom code to
  set the config-source when neither providing a local `config.edn` file nor
  setting a system-property can be used (e.g., webapps).

### v0.3.0

- Add support for using custom data-readers when loading the config EDN. Tags
  with a `config` namespace (e.g., `#config/foo`) will have the corresponding
  data-reader function's namespace automatically loaded.

### v0.2.0

- Add in-repl ability to reload with a different config.

## License

    Copyright © Outpace Systems, Inc.

    Released under the Apache License, Version 2.0

Commit message:

Add :check flag to generator.

README.md, after:

# Config

A library for declaring configuration vars and setting their values in a
centralized fashion. Included tooling allows one to gather and emit all config
vars and their docstrings, default values, etc.

[Latest API Docs](https://outpace.github.io/config/latest/)

[Stable (0.13.0) API Docs](https://outpace.github.io/config/0.13.0/)

[![Build Status](https://travis-ci.org/outpace/config.svg?branch=master)](https://travis-ci.org/outpace/config)


## Installation

Applications and libraries wishing to declare config vars should add the
following to the `project.clj` file:

[![Clojars Project](http://clojars.org/com.outpace/config/latest-version.svg)](http://clojars.org/com.outpace/config)

Applications may also include the following to ease
[generating a `config.edn` file](#generator-usage):

```clojure
:aliases {"config" ["run" "-m" "outpace.config.generate"]}
```


## Motivation

Most configuration systems rely on consumers pulling named values from something
akin to a global map
(cf. [environ](https://github.com/weavejester/environ)). This yields a number of
negative consequences:

- It is difficult to identify what configuration values are required by a
  system.
- There is no single place to put documentation for a configurable entry.
- Multiple consumers may independently pull directly from the configuration
  source, leaving only the configuration key to reveal their shared dependency.
- Default values for missing configuration can be inconsistent across consumers.
- Sources of configuration values are widely varied, e.g., properties files,
  system environment variables.

This library attempts to address the above issues by:

- Using declaration of configurable vars, which can be documented, defaulted,
  and used as a canonical source of data for other code just as any other
  library-specific var would be.
- Providing introspection into the configurable surface of an application and
  its dependencies.
- Relying on pushing values to all configuration vars, and doing so from a
  single source.


## Overview

Configuration is provided in an [EDN](http://edn-format.org) map of namespaced
symbols (naming a config var) to the value to be bound to the corresponding var:

```clojure
{
com.example/greeting       "Hello World!"
com.example/tree           {:id 1, :children #{{:id 2} {:id 3}}}
com.example/aws-secret-key #config/env "AWS_SECRET_KEY"
com.example/path           #config/property "some.path"
com.example/db-password    #config/file "db-password.txt"
com.example/secret-edn     #config/edn #config/file "secret_key.edn"
}
```

As shown above, custom data-reader tags can be used to
[pull values from external sources](#external-config-values).

The configuration EDN map is provided to an application in one of the following
ways:

1. A `config.edn` file in the current working directory.
2. A `config.edn` java system property (e.g., a command line arg
   `-Dconfig.edn=...`). The value can be any string consumable by
   [`clojure.java.io/reader`](http://clojure.github.io/clojure/clojure.java.io-api.html#clojure.java.io/reader).
3. A `resource.config.edn` java system property pointing to a resource file.
4. Setting `outpace.config.bootstrap/explicit-config-source` to any non-nil
   value consumable by
   [`clojure.java.io/reader`](http://clojure.github.io/clojure/clojure.java.io-api.html#clojure.java.io/reader).

The `:profiles` entry of your `project.clj` file can be used to set the system
property for an environment-specific configuration EDN file:

```clojure
:profiles {:test {:jvm-opts ["-Dconfig.edn=test-config.edn"]}
           :prod {:jvm-opts ["-Dconfig.edn=prod-config.edn"]}}
```

Alternatively, different profiles can share the same config file name, but use different resource paths:

```clojure
:profiles {:test {:resource-paths ["test_resources"] :jvm-opts ["-Dresource.config.edn=app-config.edn"]}
           :prod {:resource-paths ["prod_resources"] :jvm-opts ["-Dresource.config.edn=app-config.edn"]}}
```


## Config Usage

Declaring config vars is straightforward:

```clojure
(require '[outpace.config :refer [defconfig]])

(defconfig my-var)

(defconfig var-with-default 42)

(defconfig ^:dynamic *rebindable-var*)

(defconfig ^:required required-var)

(defconfig ^{:validate [number? "Must be a number."
                        even?   "Must be even."]}
           an-even-number)
```

As shown above, the `defconfig` form supports anything a regular `def` form
does, as well as the following metadata:
- `:required` When true, an exception will be thrown if no default nor
  configured value is provided. See also `defconfig!`
- `:validate` A vector of alternating single-arity predicates and error
  messages. After a value is set on the var, an exception will be thrown when a
  predicate, passed the set value, yields false.

The `outpace.config` namespace includes the current state of the configuration,
and while it can be used by code to explicitly pull config values, **this is
strongly discouraged**; just use `defconfig`.


## External Config Values

Recognizing that it is not always appropriate to provide configuration values
directly in the config file, custom data-readers can be used to instead convert
a tagged literal in the config to an externally-provided value.  This allows one
to still grasp the full configuration of an app, and at least know where a value
will come from, if not the value itself.

The provided data-readers' tags are:

- `#config/env` Tags a string, interpreted as the name of an environment
  variable, and yields the string value of the environment variable. If the
  environment does not have that entry, then the var will use its default value
  or remain unbound.
- `#config/property` Tags a string, interpreted as the name of java system
  property, and yields the string value of the property. If there is no property
  defined by this name, then the var will use its default value or remain
  unbound.
- `#config/file` Tags a string, interpreted as a path to a file, and yields the
  string contents of the file. If the file does not exist, then the var will use
  its default value or remain unbound.
- `#config/edn` Tags a string, interpreted as a single EDN-formatted object, and
  yields the read object.  When composed with `#config/env`, `#config/file`, or
  `#config/property`, if the external value is not provided, then the var will
  use its default value or remain unbound.

[Custom data-readers](http://clojure.org/reader#The Reader--Tagged Literals)
whose tag namespace is `config` will be automatically loaded during config
initialization. See `outpace.config/read-env` for an example of how to properly
implement a custom data-reader.


## Backup configuration sources

It is possible to use `#config/or` to be able to use multiple sources of
external configuration values.  It tags a vector where the first external value
will be used.

In the following example, the value from the environment variable `APP_HOME`
will be used.  However, if it is not provided, it will fall back to the
`app.home` system property.  If neither external value is availabe, the var
will use its default value or remain unbound.

```clojure
#config/or [#config/env "APP_HOME"
            #config/property "app.home"]
```


## Generator Usage

The `outpace.config.generate` namespace exists to generate a `config.edn` file
containing everything one may need to know about the state of the config vars in
the application and its dependent namespaces. If a `config.edn` file is already
present, its contents will be loaded, and thus preserved by the replacing file.

To generate a `config.edn` file, invoke the following in the same directory as
your `project.clj` file:

```bash
lein run -m outpace.config.generate
```

Alternately, one can just invoke `lein config` by adding the following to
`project.clj`:

```clojure
:aliases {"config" ["run" "-m" "outpace.config.generate"]}
```

The generator can take an optional `:check` flag (e.g., `lein config :check`)
that causes it to print unbound and unused config vars to stdout. It will not
generate a config file.

The generator can also take a `:strict` flag (e.g., `lein config :strict`)
that will result in an exception after file generation if there are any config
vars with neither a default value nor configured value. This can be used to
provide feedback to automated build systems.

The following is an example of a generated `config.edn` file:

```clojure
{

;; UNBOUND CONFIG VARS:

; This is the docstring for the 'foo' var. This
; var does not have a default value.
#_com.example/foo


;; UNUSED CONFIG ENTRIES:

com.example/bar 123


;; CONFIG ENTRIES:

; The docstring for aaa.
com.example/aaa :configured-aaa

; The docstring for bbb. This var has a default value.
com.example/bbb :configured-bbb #_:default-bbb

; The docstring for ccc. This var has a default value.
#_com.example/ccc #_:default-ccc

}
```

The first section lists commented-out config vars that do not have a default
value nor configured value, thus will be unbound at runtime. If a config value
is provided, these entries will be re-categorized after regeneration.

The second section lists config entries that have no corresponding config
var. This may happen after code change, or when a dependent library has been
removed. If the config var reappears, these entries will be re-categorized after
regeneration.

The third section lists all config vars used by the system, and their respective
values.  For reference purposes, commented-out default values will be included
after the configured value.  Likewise, commented-out entries will be included
when their default values are used.

## Change Log

### v0.13.0
- Add support for loading configuration from resources via the
  `resources.config.edn` system property. @rafalprzywarski

### v0.12.0
- Add support for `#config/or`

### v0.11.0
- Fixed `outpace.config.repl/reload` to re-read config.

### v0.10.0
- Add `#config/property` data-reader which sets a config var's value to the
  contents of a Java property.

### v0.9.0
- A required config (e.g. defconfig!) will not cause an error when running the
  generator.
- When running the generator if an error occurs, its details will be printed.

### v0.8.0
- `extract` and `provides?` now recursively visit data structures.  This allows
  something like the following in your `config.edn` file (which did not work
  before):

  ```clojure
  {foo.bar/aws-creds {:access-key #config/env "AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID"
                      :secret-key #config/env "AWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY"}}
  ```

### v0.7.0
- Add `#config/edn` data-reader which can be composed with other readers to
  interpret values from content.

### v0.6.0
- Add `#config/file` data-reader which sets a config var's value to the contents
  of a file.

### v0.5.0

- Add `:validate` metadata support to `defconfig`.
- Generator now pretty-prints wide values.

### v0.4.0

- Add ability to set the config-source explicitly in-code. Allows custom code to
  set the config-source when neither providing a local `config.edn` file nor
  setting a system-property can be used (e.g., webapps).

### v0.3.0

- Add support for using custom data-readers when loading the config EDN. Tags
  with a `config` namespace (e.g., `#config/foo`) will have the corresponding
  data-reader function's namespace automatically loaded.

### v0.2.0

- Add in-repl ability to reload with a different config.

## License

    Copyright © Outpace Systems, Inc.

    Released under the Apache License, Version 2.0
